so we're trying something a little bit
new this week at healthy gamer um so a
lot of people like thousands of people
have expressed interest or curiosity
about becoming coaches um i also know
that a ton of people in our community
are really interested in like
understanding motivation
so part of what we're going to be doing
today is teaching our coaches like how
to think about goal setting and
motivation we're going to be explaining
some principles of psychology and
neuroscience and things like that and i
think actually it can be useful for
people in our community to kind of like
learn this stuff on their own
um
a one or two interesting kind of points
to remember the first is that this is
not really geared towards a diy
perspective right so this is a training
that we do for our coaches so they can
help other people do it so um that
perspective may be a little bit
different so a lot of people had
questions yesterday about like can i do
this myself how do i do this by myself
um there are certainly ways of doing
that but that's not quite the focus so
we're still going to share all the
principles because we think those are
useful but especially today for example
we're going to share some of the
mechanisms through which behavioral
change happens in a neuroscience from a
neuroscience perspective and so some of
those mechanisms are specifically
they specifically inform how we've
designed our coaching program so our
coaching program is sort of designed to
take advantage of some of these things
which it may be harder for you to
implement kind of on your own but you
can absolutely sort of still benefit
from them now we get to the four types
of intent
or the four dimensions of intent
so when when someone says i have a goal
i
what are the four things that could be
driving this person like why do people
pick goals
like outside pressure like like family
or a society or something
okay so pressure excellent
society
family what else
values
uh what do you mean by that
um it's like something they care about
okay
so when someone feels pressured
and they say
they they're saying that i have to
accomplish this goal what is the verb
that they
use
i know it's kind of a weird
okay good excellent what else do they
say
should
absolutely
okay
so what else goes into
you know why someone does something
it's their duty
okay
so duty so what do they what's the word
that they use there so care about is a
good example of a value
what's the
worst responsibility absolutely
right
or obligation
so do you guys see how like these are
different things what i n what i should
do is different from and we'll get to
should and an obligation in a second
because you could say that your duty is
what you should do
um and i'd say the key well let's just
talk about it now so i think the big
difference is like the duty is like owed
to someone else
and there are all kinds of things that
you should do that you don't owe to
someone else does that make sense
like i should eat healthier but that's
not like a duty it's just
i should eat healthier because society
you know judges me because of my body
type and if i don't want to be poorly
judged by society or my family makes fun
of me for being like overweight or
underweight or whatever
like that's that's a should but it's not
something that i owe someone so you can
use the word should for duty but this is
exactly the point of like having this
discussion because these are actually
different internal drives that share the
same language and so when people use
unsophisticated language they don't
diagnose the problem correctly like i'm
sick
so as a doctor it's like sick with what
right like there isn't medicine for
sickness
there are treatments for diseases and we
need specificity of our language to
figure out where the problem is so that
we can fix it
there's one big bucket that we're
missing
what desire or what yeah perfect desires
right
this has nothing to do with duty or
obligation it's like sometimes you know
dr k just needs a hot dog like that has
nothing to do with you know what i
should be eating or or values or
anything like that it's just like i
smell you know there's some korean
corn dog place that opened up sort of
near where i live there's always a line
out the door i don't actually like
really want to eat it but sometimes when
i walk by i get curious and i smell it
and and so that's you know there are
desires right i want to play league
because i want to school some noobs
so if we kind of look at these
one of the things that i i kind of
notice is that some of these result in a
loss for me like i have to give
something up and some of these result in
a gain
and then the other kind of dimension is
that some of these lead to like
external
um what's the term i want to use here
once i figured out a good term
yeah so external reward
and internal reward
okay
so where do you all think desires go
which quadrant would you put them in
when i satisfy my desires do i gain
something or do i lose something
gain absolutely and do i gain an
internal reward or an external reward
external
yeah so this is where desires go so this
is going to be kind of weird but like i
define external reward as something that
includes a bodily satisfaction right
it's like some kind of pleasure so let's
think a little bit about the things that
i should do
like my family wants to become a doctor
where does that go is that a gain or a
loss
for me
it's a loss
yeah it's kind of weird so you gotta you
gotta run with my system here okay
it's not this isn't signed there's no
ohm's law for this dr k's impression
like i have to give something up that's
the way i kind of think about a loss
right so i have to give up potentially
like my own happiness
and what about internal reward or
external reward what's the advantage of
doing things that i should do
it's an external reward absolutely right
so i want to be a professional video
gamer but that's not a respectable
profession and i can't really hold my
head up high while i'm grinding like a
professional video game but if i'm a
doctor and i put that on my tinder
profile that comes with a lot of
prestige even though i hate myself on
the inside because you know i did
something that i don't really want to do
for the wrong reasons
so shoulds
go here
where do values go
bottom right
absolutely so walk me through that
um you're gaining
something because you're doing it
because you value it and it's also
internal to yourself
as opposed to a hot dog
yeah right so like when i when i do
things that i care about i usually get
something out of it
right so like if like let's say that i
you know i care about my children so i'm
gonna take care of them when they're
sick
actually that may be a
obligation we'll get get to that in a
second but generally speaking things
that you care about in my experience
tend to come to
um tend to come with some kind of gain
like you get some sort of like personal
satisfaction out of it and like the
reward that you gain is not something
that is shown to the the external world
there's no prestige with it there may
not necessarily be like bodily enjoyment
with it so like a good example of this
is let's say that i enjoy hiking and i
climb to the top of a mountain
i i'm not it's like generally speaking
like does it cost me something sure like
it requires effort right so doing things
that you care about sometimes require
effort but it like feels good on the
inside and you get to the top and
there's like a view and like you feel
kind of like amazing so that's something
like doing things that you care about
and so then our last bucket is duty kind
of goes up here
and so if we think about duty duty
usually involves sacrifice right so it's
like a loss it's not something that
necessarily like i want to do for my
sake it's an obligation or something
that i owe so it like costs me something
but it's very satisfying to do so for
example taking care of my kids when
they're sick like overnight
um is something that feels like
internally satisfying as a parent
because like i know i'm being a good
parent
it's not something that i'm posting on
social media or anything that i'm gonna
like get prestige or enjoyment out of
and it actually costs me something right
because i have to stay up all night and
like try to take care of them and all
that kind of good stuff
so duty kind of goes up here does that
make sense
so let me ask y'all when people kind of
come to you and they they come up with
goals and they say like oh i have these
goals what
quadrant what quadrant or quadrants do
you think the average client that you
all deal with is operating from
shows her desires
what do y'all think about
that
agree with is that alan yeah i would say
should's
right so
so we've got two votes for shoulds
one vote for desire what about the
rustial
yeah
okay i think should because if someone
had a desire they would be able to do it
without a coach
okay so when you think about their lives
and the behaviors that they engage in
what what do you think actually drives
them and like what shapes their behavior
eli
so not just the things you asked me the
question again yeah so you said that
they come to coaching and they i've
already satisfied their desires what
they need help with is the shoulds well
very well said so i'm going to ask you
to dig a little bit deeper and for the
things that like most of what they
actually do the behaviors that your
clients engage in what do you think is
the driving force for what they're able
to what they're doing without you
gotcha um i'd say a lot of times desires
like if you take your corndog example
most people don't need a coach to go buy
a corn dog they have enough motive
motivation if you will by themselves to
go do that okay and so like i know this
so this is going to be kind of actually
forget the leading question so well said
so i completely agree so in my
experience
most people operate from the left side
of the quadrant and operating from the
left side of the quadrant can sometimes
make people happy but generally speaking
like what we're talking about is living
a life of external reward and then the
other thing that tends to happen is like
when you're living a life of external
reward
and it's kind of like loss oriented like
the loss of the should if if you're
living a life of external reward you
can't
like
afford that loss i don't know how else
to put it right so what i'd say is that
when people actually move from this
quadrant to this quadrant or this
quadrant to this quadrant this is when
their motivation starts to move in a
positive direction they feel good about
themselves and they take control of
their lives what do y'all think about
that
that's a that's a hypothesis or
assertion that i'm putting forward which
all can agree or disagree with
definitely agree
right so this is something that we also
see in addiction psychiatry so in
addiction psychiatry people have a
powerful biological driver
that is forcing them to use a substance
right so biology doesn't even enter this
like this equation when you have biology
entering it what we kind of go more
towards is like i'd say that biology is
sort of maybe undesires right because
that's like reward circuitry and
dopamine and stuff like that
so this also maybe is like where youtube
and gaming and stuff live
and so when it when it comes to helping
someone overcome an addiction like
literally the process that we try to do
there's a whole system of therapy called
acceptance and commitment therapy which
is sort of based on it's another one of
these like novel therapies that takes a
sprinkling of eastern wisdom and then
packages up in a western way and calls
itself something new some interesting
cultural appropriation going on there so
act as an evidence-based treatment for
um
is an evidence-based treatment for
addictions
and what the goal of act is is it sort
of says that the more that you move
people into this quadrant the easier it
is to overcome addictions
and that's been my experience as well
like like people have to have a clear
reason
to make the sacrifice right like they
have to make the sacrifice or give up
the external reward and there has to be
something i want you all to understand
it's like any time we're talking about
motivation right there's a pro and a con
in someone's brain there's a calculation
that's going on constantly should i do
this thing or should i not do this thing
should i eat the hot dog or should i not
eat the hot dog and what keeps people
stuck is essentially like a conflict
between two of these quadrants
so i should do this
but i want to do this and then we feel
paralyzed
it's my duty to do this
but i want to do this
right
i want to do this but this is what i
care about
i actually do genuinely care about like
being healthy and i hate the way that i
feel when i like drink too much
at the same time i want to get
absolutely hammered and go party and
have fun with my friends
and so what keeps people stuck is
actually like conflicts between these
two
these different quadrants does that make
sense
so as a coach what our goal is is to
help people essentially move from this
side
over here
and how do y'all think we do that
what's our methodology
create awareness and understanding of
what's going on
absolutely
absolutely that's that's the key thing
awareness and understanding
okay
and that may sound kind of weird because
like wha how does awareness and
understanding like actually create how
does that drive behavior like once you
clarify this stuff for people like how
does that help them
because when you can see
like the
driving forces behind these things it's
much easier to understand them and then
shift around your own personal values
for your choices absolutely right so i
know it sounds kind of weird but like
you know like when when our clients come
in and they say like i have this goal
and i should do it so like let's use the
example of like the student who doesn't
feel like studying
right so like what is the student who
doesn't feel like studying like what do
they say to you
like what language you should study
absolutely
right and then you ask them what makes
it harder like why don't you study and
what do they say
i don't want to there you go there it is
right it's that simple so they're stuck
right here
and so like the way that you help that
client like is by sort of clarifying
like their values right like so this is
where you know when i work with clients
who are like that it's sort of thinking
about okay like what do you actually
care about why are you actually in
college
you know why did you go here is it to
fulfill a societal obligation is that
why you went to college or is there
something genuinely that you can come to
appreciate about college is there
anything that we can figure out here
that aligns with what you actually care
about because if you can help that
person uncover
what
what about college aligns with them and
that could even be duty you could even
like come to the revelation i've had
students do this who sort of say that
like okay my parents have supported me
they're paying for my college i owe them
like some degree of like work right
because they're paying for me so i
should do this
and then what and then it's it's not
like a vague should it actually even
though they use the word should it
crosses over into duty and then we see a
positive behavioral change once you
align studying with their values we see
a positive behavioral change because
then even if you're if you're giving
something up even if there's a loss
involved if it kind of like if you're
giving something up but you can make
that class your own like if you kind of
say okay well i'm in college i'm
studying finance but i really care about
philosophy and what i'm going to do is
like minor in philosophy and you sort of
help them sort of uncover
you know some plan to help them act in a
way that's aligned with their values and
you'll see positive behavioral change
okay does that make sense
okay yes so the second thing so the key
takeaway here is that you know as a
coach what you want to do is clarify
like what is driving this person clarify
their intent and as you clarify that
their intent you can start to ask them
questions that sort of
help them understand like what is on
this side of the equation and how do we
get from like this side of the equation
to this side of the equation how do we
get and what's the conflict that they
face and the cool thing about human
beings is once you bring a subconscious
conflict to the surface in a conscious
manner it tends to move towards the
right direction okay
so that those are the four types of
intent any questions before we move on
okay
so the next thing that we're going to do
is talk about raising the uh the
awareness of negative
so this is a big problem that a lot of
people who set goals and like have
intent you know these kind of intent
problems have which is that they don't
really appreciate the negative so when
someone talks about a goal
like and they say like okay my goal is
to study every day like what kind of
you know is that like a positive thing
in their mind or a negative thing in
their mind
when people think about like meeting
their goals so what is like the
emotional energy behind that what's the
valence there
some part of it is like resemblance or
the situation they're in ah okay
great good
is that conscious or unconscious
what do you would say unconscious
yeah i mean they may be somewhat
conscious of it but for the most part
it's unconscious right so when i think
about losing weight
is that idea filled with resentment or
like
or what
right when i think about getting a 4.0
gpa like is the primary emotion that i
feel when i think about that resentment
what's the primary emotion that people
feel when they they kind of think about
fulfilling their goals
some kind of excitement yeah so it's
positive in nature right so it's like
exciting
achievement
pride
right so this is interesting so like
when someone's is kind of thinking about
their goals in a very positive manner
um you know you're i'm gonna post it on
social media like i'm gonna advertise
i'm gonna get into harvard and i'm gonna
like buy a harvard hoodie in a harvard
hat and then a harvard bumper sticker
and then everyone's gonna know i went to
harvard it's gonna be great
so what happens when they sort of have
all of these like positive like
expectations or ideas of achieving their
goals and they set out to actually like
achieve their goals
doesn't easily work sustainably
why not
because part of their brain is sort of
thought that they've already done it and
so there's less motivation to do it and
part of it is that whenever there's like
an implicit judgment about what you're
doing it's like putting white gas in
your car like it'll kind of get you
going for a little while like you can do
almost anything for a week or two and
then it's just not going to work all
that well
okay excellent someone's been watching
dr k's guide i think
their motivation is hinged oh sorry
allen go ahead oh it's just gonna say
yeah it's pretty good have you have you
seen it
steve
i was gonna say their motivation is
hinged on the outcome not absent their
action
right so when we so when we people think
about goals in a positive way which is
like sort of how we defaultly think
about them it's like it's a weird
sentence to say because like of course
we want to achieve our goals like why do
we want to achieve our goals because of
like some something positive duh that's
why they're my goals to begin with but
there's interesting it's interesting
because what actually happens is we
create an expectation
so let's say like i think about how
awesome it's going to be when i get into
shape it's going to be great i create
this expectation of how like i'm going
to be a chad and i'm going to go to the
beach and like it's gonna be like chad
city up in here
and then i go to the gym
and what's my experience in the gym
it's hard
yep right i'm huffing i'm puffing the
shame and afterwards people there who
are in shape and you're not oh there you
go right
and after one week
i look at my flabby ass in the mirror
and what do i see am i am i dr chad
thundercock now
his is the action that i've taken
what is the correlation between the
action that i've taken and the
expectation that i have
it's fallen way short absolutely and
then what does that do to my motivation
decrease
absolutely right
so this is the big thing like when
people come in and they're like i'm
fired up like i'm achieve this goal i'm
gonna make my life
what i want it to be
you know i'm gonna crush it
i'm gonna make a million dollars i'm
gonna get into shape i'm gonna like it's
gonna be awesome like i'm gonna do so
good
i'm gonna become a pro league of legends
player it's going to be awesome
and so like it's kind of weird but like
one of the key things we can do as a
coach is raise awareness of the negative
so a couple of important things there
the first thing that we do when we raise
awareness of the negative is we fix this
expectation issue because we set
appropriate expectations and the problem
is that when they set inappropriate
expectations and they go out and they do
something
and what happens doesn't align with
their expectations it tanks their
motivation and then they quit
right and then they feel ashamed of
themselves
and then they feel they get the identity
of a quitter
gg get wrecked noobs
game over
right so this cycle happens so fast and
it starts with here
okay or it doesn't identify the quitter
sounds harsh so they're like all these
like milder versions of this right
they're like oh i'm not good at that
like i'm good at being a programmer but
i'm like not good at actually making
video games
like you know there are things that
we've spent a decade training in and so
we'll see this a lot in our community as
well where they're like they're people
who are doing pretty well in life but
like when it comes to doing things that
they find
that they value so there are a lot of
people that can actually do the should
column really well we'll get these
people too and when you talk to them
that they feel unhappy and you talk to
them about oh you know what about things
that you value there'll be some kind of
identity thing there
right they'll feel like okay i'm not
quite as talented as like other
musicians
or they'll say things like i've already
invested so much into this career that
like
i would feel behind if i switched now or
it's too late right and if they start
saying things like that what is that
where what part of the mind is that
coming from
if they say i'm behind other musicians
because i've spent 10 years as a
programmer that's that's the ego
ego absolutely right so it doesn't have
to look like you know a quit
shamed
like neat kind of person right like th
this stuff this cycle manifests in
people who are like very healthy and
very successful it's just the way that
the mind works
so first thing that we're going to do by
raising awareness of the negative is
that we're going to like deal with the
idea of expectation and as your clients
learn how to expect
appropriate things from their actions
it'll actually like
disable this cycle and they'll be able
to retain motivation
the second thing that raising awareness
of the negative does
is
let me think about what number two is
has to do with ambivalence
okay
so can somebody define ambivalence for
me again
it's like you're sitting on the fence
absolutely right so like
on the fence
so if we kind of go back oh
if we go back to this like these
conflicts or ambivalence you'll see that
this is this is ambivalence right here
so anytime that humans have a desire to
do something or i mean i'm using the
word desire loosely here
anytime that a human wants to do
something
if they don't do it there's something
that's getting in the way and so the
other thing that happens with our
clients is like they think about
you know
what they want to accomplish but they
don't really appreciate what keeps them
from accomplishing it so this is kind of
weird but like a lot of people in in the
digital generation they say that they
lack motivation they don't lack
motivation they actually have a ton of
motivation and i want you guys to think
about this is going to sound kind of
weird
if i play a video if i wake up and i
let's say like i'm a video game addict
right and i watch video i play video
games all day long and my life is
falling apart
and i describe myself as unmotivated
what do y'all think about that
am i unmotivated
no
why do you say no david you just really
motivated to play video games absolutely
right so i want you guys to really
appreciate this
if playing video games is destroying
every dimension of my life
it's screwing up my relationships it's
screwing up my health it's screwing up
my professional prospects it's screwing
up my grades
for that high of a cost i want you all
to recognize that there must be a pro on
the other side of that equation
in order to continue that behavior and
this is the thing that no one thinks
about being a video game addict is a
huge pro in their mind but it absolutely
is because that's just like literally
how the brain works
human beings do not engage in like
generally speaking negative things we
default to things that on balance
benefit us that's how we've evolved so
how do i know like how you know how far
to hunt or what kind of territory to
have it's because on balance the pros
outweigh the cons that's just how
evolution works
so by raising awareness of the negative
we're sort of highlighting costs
oh sorry i said highly
so we highlight costs and then we kind
of like help people understand like what
is on the other side of the equation
because the other problem with people
who are unmotivated is they they just
don't understand it right they're like i
don't know every part of my life is
falling apart because i'm addicted to
video games i just don't know why i
can't do something about it there's a
huge blind spot in their mind and the
high the blind spot is actually
highlighting the costs or in a weird way
for a negative behavior it's
highlighting the benefit
so in either case it's about both sides
of the fence
okay
so the advantage of sort of highlighting
the negative or in some sense the pro
like the reason i'm talking about the
negative is when i think about okay i
want to become a doctor and that's the
goal that i have there's like a negative
to that there's a huge cost to that
which is why i'm not doing it that's why
i'm not engaging in the behavior
does that make sense so it can be
positive or negative but we're basically
talking about the flip side of the coin
and the cool thing about that is once
again we have evidence-based
motivational interviewing and once you
highlight the negative and you raise
that ambivalence and you start working
with them using the stages of change
model
that's when you start to see positive
change but that has to start with
awareness of the negative and working on
that ambivalence until you can't move
someone past ambivalence you can't move
someone past an internal conflict if
they don't know what the internal
conflict is and eventually what you want
to get to is to the point where your
client is making a choice
and once they understand that they're
making a choice every single day i have
a choice today to play league of legends
or take one insignificant step towards
the life that i want to which one am i
going to pick and once they understand
that it's going to be an insignificant
step it's going to feel insignificant
they're going to study today but it's
not going to give them a 4.0 that
they'll never get a 4.0 but who do i
want to be do i want to live a life that
is in service to my values filled with
external rewards or do i want to live a
life that is in service to what i care
about and is going to lead to internal
reward once that choice becomes clear in
their mind which you're going to help
them do and we'll explain a little bit
about the neuroscience of how that works
then they start making choices in the
right direction right and also from
motivational interviewing we know from
numerous scientific studies that this
methodology is actually effective at
creating a behavioral change in the
right direction
okay
so working on ambivalence
um
okay and then we get to the third
advantage of raising the awareness of
the negative which is that this is kind
of weird but paradoxically
so this is going to sound kind of weird
i may have kind of
spoiled you all already but once the
cost of a behavior increases in my mind
what does that actually do to my ability
or with my likelihood to engage in the
behavior
it lowers it so that's what one would
think
but paradoxically increasing cost
can sometimes
drive behavior
okay
and that may sound really weird because
it is so this is where like we're not
really sure how this works we just know
multiple instances of like human
behavior where this is the case
so the first example is actually comes
from wine tasting okay so people have
done studies on wine tasting
and like
what do you all think so if i if i blind
a group of people like let's say expert
sommeliers which are like professional
wine tasters and i blind them to a wine
like to like let's say i give them five
bottles of wine that have various costs
what do you think happens do you think
the sommeliers can tell which wine is
like
do you think they can tell that the more
expensive wine actually tastes better
no
so it's interesting because you're
correct so like people like the
interesting thing about sommeliers is
they'll agree there'll be consensus
about which wines are better than others
so they can rank the wines from one two
three four five but there will be like
no correlation with dollar signs
now they do a second experiment
where they tell them
they're not blinded to price
what do you think happens when
wine tasters are not blinded to price in
terms of how they rate wines
the more expensive ones taste better
absolutely so the price drives the
perception of quality
okay so this is like there have been
scientific studies on this
and so like like corporations use this
all the time in terms of like you know
they'll use it for sales for example so
when i say that oh this this car costs a
hundred thousand dollars but you can get
it on sale for like forty thousand
dollars there's this perception of value
that like is created by the cost that
you pay
it's kind of bizarre the other good
example of this is there have been a lot
of studies on hazing
and what effect does hazing have on
someone's like value of the group
they're being hazed to join
like if i get hey if i have to get hayes
to join a frat what happens to my
perception of the value of the frat
it goes up
absolutely
increases value and if we think about it
like if i tell you
like i'm going to tell you hey if you
want to join this frat it's going to
[ __ ] suck we're going to tie you up
naked seriously happened at
you you know the university i went to
when i was a freshman
like there was one fraternity that would
tie up their pledges naked on a tree
they'd like
tie them up onto trees and then the
people in the frat would piss on them
make you naked i'm going to piss on you
and it's going to be awful what do y'all
think like how many people do you think
dropped out of hazing like after the the
pledge process after being demeaned and
paying this huge humiliating cost
not my friend by the way but
i'll say like none
absolutely
so i know it's
weird okay like i don't understand
exactly why this happens
but as coaches like we sort of don't
care right so what we're gonna do as
coaches is we're gonna use psychology
and neuroscience to help our clients get
to where they need to go
and like we're not saying we're going to
haze them or anything like that right we
don't want to do that that's not we're
not going to be we're going to be like
authentic and compassionate but what we
can learn is that paradoxically high
front loaded costs can actually
incentivize behavior and what we see
this time and time and time again right
if you tell your client hey like what do
you think going to the gym is like
they're going to be like oh i think it's
going to be tough and you guys raise
awareness of the negative you're going
to be like it may be really hard you may
feel ashamed okay what's gonna happen
like let's think about it how are we
gonna deal with that shame where does
that shame come from like how are you
gonna feel
and then what do they say when you
actually like get them to go if you've
prepped them about the negative costs
what do they say when they come back
it wasn't that bad
absolutely so here's the key thing
all right
what does this
statement do to their motivation
how does this statement affect whether
they go tomorrow or
not it increases absolutely
right
so this is why we want to raise
awareness of the negative there are
actually multiple mechanisms that are
really important about raising awareness
of the negative the first is that we
deal with their expectations we set
appropriate expectations the second is
that by elevating the cost
so i don't know if you all have this or
if you all have ever seen this but like
we see examples of this all the time so
another good example is like you know
parents who are like living vicariously
through their children
so they've given up
so much for their child and so the value
of that sacrifice like increases in
their mind and like drives all kinds of
sometimes negative behaviors you can see
this in like narcissistic parents too
where they've like paid a big cost so it
must mean
that like there's big value to what i've
done if i quit my job and i gave up my
career to raise you
that means that i must have done a very
good job does that make sense like they
can't tolerate the idea there's a bunch
of cognitive dissonance which is
probably the mechanism here by the way
is like cognitive dissonance
is that we're sort of leveraging
cognitive dissonance in a positive way
to like get people aligned to move in
the direction that they want to go and
in the case of like narcissistic parents
it's kind of the other way around where
like to prevent that cognitive
dissonance like it feels dumb to like
pay a cost and not get value out of it
so as you sort of raise awareness of the
cost you can actually drive positive
behavior okay and then the third thing
is ambivalence and sort of working
through that ambivalence which sort of
drives people in the right direction
questions about you know how to clarify
intent or the value of raising awareness
of the negative
yeah i don't fully understand how the
last part the paradoxical thing might
work in a session so i i guess my
understanding is okay so we're going to
raise a lot of awareness of the
negatives which increases the cost and
therefore when they actually try it then
it drives the behavior more is that
what it is
so so
in session i think the main thing like
so the questions that you want to ask is
like for a given goal like what's it
going to cost you
right like that's the question you want
to ask
like what do you have to give up by
doing this
so if i start if i if the goal is to get
me to stop playing like a game all day
what do i give up what do i lose
by
not playing the game
because that's not something most people
think about what what most people just
think about is like what do i gain by
quitting gaming
and so then what happens is like they're
not aware that there's like
like and then it's kind of silly because
like when they try to give up gaming so
let's say that the advantages of gaming
is that like let's just take this
example okay so for gaming
what are the advantages if i play video
games all day like what do i get from
that
emotional suppression
absolutely
fun
distracted socialization
yep socialization
dopamine get some of that sweet sweet
dopamine or fun right
so and everyone what what people tend to
look at is like the advantages of
achieving a goal so they think like oh
my god like i'm gonna get money and i'm
gonna you know get healthy and i'm gonna
become independent
and i'm gonna be confident
right this is what they're focusing on
and then when they try to do it like
they're not prepared for like this
so like the cause they're not prepared
for the shame
they're not prepared for the loneliness
and they're not prepared for the boredom
and so if they're not like ready for
this like what's gonna happen when they
stop playing games for a day
like this is gonna hit and then like
their brain is like this feels bad
why the hell are we doing this
let's go back to the gaming like which
one do you think your brain is gonna
pick
i give you a choice red pill blue pill
one involves having fun and having
friends and one involves shame
loneliness and boredom which one are you
gonna pick
so you have to help people understand
that there's a cost
and oddly enough like
the more that you emphasize cost
so let me ask y'all like when you
emphasize cost like which way are you
moving
in this quadrant
away from desires
away from desire is sure so i'd say that
like if we think about cost right cost
is up here so like this is how you move
people in this direction
and then what you do is you help people
like okay what do you care about as you
clarify that
you know so this is how you get away
from desires absolutely and then you're
in the shoulds and then like you know
there are other techniques that you can
use to move people to the right
does that make sense
does that answer your question tom
i think so so we're trying to highlight
the
the cost that it's going to cost a lot
in terms of shame loneliness boredom and
then for some reason paradoxically that
actually drives behavior yeah so so like
you know we don't want to over emphasize
it because chances are they're blind to
it so we want to raise some awareness of
it and then what happens is like once
they know what to expect right then
we're engaging this circuit whatever the
hell this is
because then when they try and you say
hey like i think this next week so if
you want to quit gaming i'm behind you
i think it's going to be tough
i know you can do it bro but it ain't
going to be easy
right does that like does that make
sense in terms of a coach like as a
coach like how that will help someone
move in the right direction
yeah that that definitely helps to
clarify right so like it's like hey bro
this ain't gonna be easy
or but like this is what it could look
like so i want you to be prepared and
then you can also engage a lot of other
like super practical stuff since it's
gonna be so hard you know i know you
want to stop gaming for a week but like
you may just last one or two days at a
time how are you going to feel if you
fail after one or two days
and let's remember that this can take
practice right so then you're going to
prep them from failure you're going to
do all that kind of good stuff and then
when they come in they say okay i was
only able to make it three days and you
could say hold on a second on your first
attempt
you didn't meet your goal of one week
but you actually went 72 hours without
playing a single video game
that's amazing
and you view that as a failure
and you went 72 hours
like i can see that you didn't meet your
goal but on the flip side like if you
did it for one day if you did it for two
days and you did it for three days like
you could probably do it for three days
again
let's figure out how you can do it for
three days again you adjust their goal
we'll kind of get to that in a second
but that's the iterative aspect right
so it all kind of ties together in a
practical sense we've got you know a
list of questions and exercises by the
way and like even dialogue sample
dialogue for y'all that we'll give y'all
in the manual
okay
that'll clarify a lot of these things
okay so now we get to the fun part
presuming this hasn't been fun already
okay so now what we're gonna do
is talk about
how
awareness changes people
so here we are
saying oh just like have conversations
about their shoulds and their values and
their desires and have conversations
about this and make them aware of the
costs so the question becomes like how
does that from a neuroscience
perspective
actually result
in like changes in their behavior and
this gets really fascinating so have you
all seen the video versus nyan um video
in dr k's guide
and can anyone kind of explain like a
tldr of like what what the takeaway from
that guy does i think if i remember
correctly vidya is knowledge and yana's
understanding so it's like objective
knowledge and subjective understanding
and the differences between the two
yep so it's information
it's objective
and then neon is
understanding
and it's subjective so which one do you
think is more responsible for behavioral
change
yeah
absolutely
right so this is once again the problem
of the internet which is that we have
tons of information out there
about how to fix your life
right
available to you for the low price of
if you sign up now
but everyone watches these things and
like it doesn't actually change their
behavior and there's new there's tons of
information from like medical science
that
information does not change behavior
right so if i have someone who's like
smoking and i say hey if you smoke
you're gonna get lung cancer
do you want lung cancer they say no do
they quit smoking
no okay right so then the question
becomes how does awareness
go from here to here like so this is
essentially what we're gonna do we're
gonna what we focus on in coaching is
not giving them information we focus on
giving them understanding so how does
that process work so it starts by
understanding two things one is that
there's explicit memory
and there's implicit memory
okay
and then there's working
we're memory
to kind of gloss over working memory for
a second so explicit memory is
information
facts
and uh
memories
does this make sense so like if i ask
you
you know what your name is
or where was the what was the address
like what city did you grow up in
that's like explicit memory it's stored
in a particular part of the brain like
the hippocampus
okay
and then implicit memory is like is
understanding so let me give you all an
example and it's stored in other parts
of the brain so let's say i want to
learn how to play basketball
so if i want to learn how to play
basketball i go and i watch youtube
videos on basketball i go and i read
books about michael i watch the michael
jordan documentary
i learn all these facts about basketball
i study like the physics of the body and
i figure out i learn all these tips
right so people say that when you're
shooting
you should you know when you're shooting
hoops you should follow through have you
all heard that before in terms of
basketball
so i like i know all the tips
what happens when i go and play
basketball i have all the information
i'm really inexperienced and not good at
making the basket
absolutely right so it doesn't actually
translate into like
workable
information right so what happens in the
brain is we have these like infra look
we have these tips and the cool thing is
that we can turn this tip of
follow-through into understanding but
then where that lives is actually the
cerebellum for basketball
so what happens is like memories
explicit memories are stored in the
hippocampus but then what happens is
that as we catalyze understanding
that information moves from the
hippocampus to other parts of our brain
and specifically for us it moves to the
frontal lobe or the neocortex
okay
so like we can i can read i can read
about motivation there are people here
who are listening to this on stream
right now and they can understand the
concepts theoretically and they can even
i can even quiz them right like the next
day i can ask chat chat what did y'all
remember about what i said but that's
all explicit memory and it lives in the
hippocampus and they can recall it but
it's not actually going to change their
lives in order to change their lives
there's actually a very in a sense
well-known process where explicit
memories from the hippocampus
essentially get encoded in other parts
of our brain
in the cerebellum in the frontal lobes
and in parts of our cortices and once
they get encoded there then they
actually affect our behavior okay so
i'll give you all an example like once
it clicks for me that i need to follow
through when i'm shooting hoops then my
body like kind of responds but the way
that it clicks is how like how do i get
information to click with shooting hoops
how do i learn how to like
shoot effectively in
your basketball
absolutely practice i gotta be saying a
whole bunch of times
play it uh play on the court right so i
gotta get on the court
okay
so now
and this sort of makes sense right like
once i play on the court like once i
practice once i get out there once i
start fluidly applying the concepts
swimming around in the concepts i don't
quite understand it right so like a lot
of being on the court is about being at
the barrier of your understanding so let
me ask y'all
what is the mental equivalent of get
playing on the court
how do we do that
how do we get in there and actually
start shooting hoops when it comes to
mental concepts
like desires studying for just 30
minutes or whatever the applicable goal
would be nope incorrect
studying is explicit information
oh sorry i meant studying in the sense
of like if your goal is
like to get a 4.0 but the small
insignificant step is studying
then you take that small insignificant
step okay so but i can't take that small
insignificant step except right steve
like that's my whole problems i can't
study
so what's the equivalent i know it's
sort of like a read my mind question but
i'm gonna stick to this one what's the
equivalent of playing on the court when
it comes to like these mental internal
processes
picking up the ball and shooting hoops
see if chat can get it
it's not doing it
okay so i know this is this is i love
these answers
this is it this is literally what we do
right so like here's the thing
there's all this theoretical crap
floating around in their head
getting them to play with it getting
them to understand i know you guys know
this right this is literally what you do
you get on the court of the mind
and you help people like understand
these concepts they play around with
them you test it this way you test it
that way you talk about it you have
revelations you have emotional catharsis
they're starting to play with these
concepts and you're bringing it out with
them that's literally what coaching is
so that's why we do coaching in the way
that we do it so like as someone you can
explain this stuff to people but as you
all work with them as you talk about
these concepts
these concepts move from information to
understanding they start to move into
your frontal lobes and like your
neocortex and like other parts of your
brain
and then they start to actually affect
your behavior
so this is also why you know as we look
at some of the the format of coaching
why do we coach people one hour a week
over eight weeks as opposed to eight
hours in one day
what do y'all think that is
we want them to do the work
uh sure
you need practice over time
absolutely so this mechanism
when does this happen do you all know
this process right here it happens at a
very specific time
when does explicit memory get encoded as
implicit memory
when does sleeping
absolutely during sleep
okay so theoretically and we've tried
this okay so we've had coaches who will
work with clients twice a week
this is also why um
we actually like generally speaking keep
sessions to an hour because remember you
have this working memory and so your
working memory gets overwritten
after 45 minutes
so like a lot of times clients will want
like 90 minute sessions or two hour
sessions because it feels good
but what we really want is we don't want
them to lose the first 45 minutes in the
next 45 minutes so a lot of the way that
we've structured our intervention is
bait
has some of these concepts baked in that
change happens over time like sure we
sort of generically know that but
hippocampus consolidation into long-term
memory and application into your
cerebellum happens during sleep so if
you want to study effectively for
example like when i was studying in
medical school part of the reason i was
effective is because i tried to take a
nap every day because studying for four
hours at a stretch is not as effective
is start studying for two hours taking a
nap and studying for two hours you give
your brain time to consolidate that
memory and turn it into understanding
questions about this
okay right on time finish on time
all right
so let's go ahead and um
but just summarize this quickly so like
if we think about basketball right it's
essentially practice
and so what is practice for the mind
like that's what we try to do in
coaching so this is where like as you
understand these concepts as you play
with these concepts as you work with
clients over time and you kind of
reinforce them what will happen is like
these concepts will start to be
internalized by your clients and then
they'll start to affect their behavior
because then then at that point it's
working from the frontal lobe like i
don't know if this sort of makes sense
but if you look at motivation and you
think about a should
so
like when i ignore the shoulds those
shoulds are coming from explicit memory
it's like i'm sitting down i'm about to
play league of legends
first thing in the morning which is like
11 a.m for me
and then this this thought pops up this
fact pops up in my head i have a thought
that gets generated from explicit memory
that says hey you should not do this but
it does not actually drive me my
behavior when you look at people who
make behavioral changes
the thought comes from a different place
it doesn't just pop up as a fact or a
bit of information that then quickly
gets ignored it comes from a completely
different place of their brain and when
it comes from the frontal lobe then it
actually results in things like impulse
control
not a fact that is coming from their
hippocampus it's an actual understanding
that results in impulse control from the
frontal lobe does that make sense to you
all or is that like a bit too abstract
do you all know what i mean
like if you examine your own thought
process
you'll recognize like you know you have
some good behaviors and if you pay
attention to where those good behaviors
come from or where change comes from in
your mind it's not actually a fact it's
something that's coming from a different
part of your brain it's something that
reigns in an impulse and drives your
behavior and that's what the frontal
lobe does as long as it's coming from
the hippocampus as long as it's a piece
of information as long as it's vidya as
long as it is it's me telling you or
your parents telling you this is bad for
you you should stop doing it it will not
change behavior it'll just be explicit
memory
this is also why parents can tell you a
thousand times to do something
but as long as it's floating around you
can remember that they told you to do
that but as long as it's coming from
your hippocampus and explicit memory
it's not going to drive behavioral
change and so the mechanism from moving
from explicit memory to implicit memory
is literally how we have designed this
coaching intervention this is the goal
and that's why we kind of say awareness
first raise awareness raise awareness
raise awareness because raising
awareness is the process that gets you
from here to here
they have to like get it right they have
to understand it they have to be aware
of it and by the way awareness is also
what strengthens the frontal lobe so
awareness comes from the frontal lobe as
well
so from a neuroscience perspective it's
like boosting the frontal lobe